---
layout: post
title:  "Grace"
date:   2022-11-28 12:12:00
categories: blog
meta: life
---

> This post leaves a lot to be desired: there's so much to elaborate on. Consider this a rough sketch and a bookmark, a vignette into my psyche and where I'm at right now, and a diving point for future discussion.  

What scares me about cancel culture is the inability for individuals to recover from their mistakes.

Back in 2019 I wrote a blog post called [Beyond Good and Evil](https://zanny.net/blog/2019/07/15/beyond-good-and-evil.html) where I talked about my deep discomfort with "bad-othering." In the words of Tara Brach, bad-othering is perceiving others as "flawed humans who are excluded from our heart." It's shutting the door on someone because we see them as the villian instead of an anti-hero -- an imperfect human vulnerable to the forces driving their life -- just like everyone else.

At my depth I believe that there are no bad people, only bad behavior. Each and every one of us is a work in progress, a unique experiment asking the question of "how can I exist as an individual, and as a part of the collective"?

When our needs aren't met by our families, community, society, we experience pain. When we don't know how to articulate, externalize, and transmute that pain, it hardens us and we start to channel it in destructive ways. Without the right perspective and guidance to relate to our experiences of pain, we may resort to crime, revenge, or self destruction to seek relief.

Even with all the privileges I’ve had – I've witnessed this process unfolding in my own life. Before coming to consciousness about my gender identity, I spent years feeling unseen, misunderstood and unconsciously directing this pain towards others. I've lashed out at my parents, close friends and done my fair share of damage.

If the golden rule is to treat others the way you want to be treated -- then I desire to give everyone the gift of ultimate grace and a pathway to recovery no matter how severe the mistake -- because this is what I would wish for for myself.

And just to be clear, recovery does not mean being permissive or allowing bad behavior to persist: if I've made a mistake I would want to know right away. Recovery means guiding someone towards a higher level consciousness, helping them understand and see their mistakes so that they may choose differently.

I'm going to leave you all with a video because I think these people are really onto something -- I feel it's no coincidence that Finland is [the happiest country in the world](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/19/finland-named-worlds-happiest-country-for-fifth-year-running):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/l554kV12Wuo" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
