---
layout: post
title:  "Paint"
date:   2023-02-27 10:22:00
categories: blog
meta: life
---

[I just finished my first painting in over a decade.](https://youtube.com/shorts/q6i78BktbE4)

∞

A week ago I was struggling emotionally and got the sudden desire to paint.

All day I walked around town with this desire and when I walked into a school supply store I walked out with a novel instead of art supplies.

Subtle are the ways we sabotage ourselves.

"Why am I thinking about painting? I’m traveling and what am I even gonna do with the canvas? I have no space in my luggage. It’s gonna be another one of my stupid impulses — I’m gonna buy all these art supplies and never use them. Besides, I should really focus on music."

I walked 10 minutes out from the store and felt regret while waiting for the taxi. 5 minutes pass and I heard myself turning around saying "fuck it."

"I don’t care if I have to give the painting away,  I don’t care if 'I should just focus on music.'

I need to fucking paint."

∞

Last time I tried to paint was 4 years ago.

I bought myself a pack of canvases, opened the first one and it just sat blank on my easel.

I felt so blocked that I couldn’t even lift my paint brush.

For 4 years this memory haunted me.

Now I get to rewrite the story.

∞

I used myself as the subject because I started this painting around Valentine’s day.

Loving myself isn’t always easy.

It requires me to recognize and give to my own needs, not dismissing them as excessive, self-indulgent, or crazy.

I have always hyper fixated on what is practical in favor of what is enjoyable.

I'm only realizing now how malnourished my soul has been.

Life is fundamentally ritual and ceremony, an infinite game where the point of life is just to have more life.  

And if it’s all frivolous, so be it.

I need art... even if art doesn’t need me.
